Blog: Pulumi Powered ai/ml on kubernetes and GCP (#14363)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/ai-ml-on-kubernetes-google-cloud-llm-rag/index.md

- **Scalability** for model training and inference
- **Complex data pipelines** that integrate various cloud services
- **Infrastructure automation** for seamless deployment

Google Cloud Kubernetes (GKE) provides a robust foundation for AI/ML workloads, but managing infrastructure manually can be cumbersome. This is where Pulumi comes in—enabling Infrastructure as Code (IaC) to automate and simplify AI/ML infrastructure on Kubernetes.

<!--more-->

## Pulumi: Automating AI/ML Infrastructure on Google Cloud

Pulumi is a modern Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool that allows teams to define and manage cloud infrastructure using general-purpose programming languages like Python, TypeScript, and Go. This approach is particularly beneficial for AI/ML teams, as Python is already the dominant language in data science and machine learning.

With Pulumi, you can:

- **Provision and scale Kubernetes clusters** on Google Cloud automatically.
- **Define AI/ML environments as code**, making deployments repeatable and version-controlled.
- **Integrate infrastructure with machine learning pipelines**, reducing operational overhead.

{{% notes "info" %}}

> Want to geek out and get the inside scoop on AI/ML using Kubernetes? Meet us at:

Reviewer: This will age pretty quick; I'd suggest you add a date. "Meet us on <date/time> ...

Author: I plan on removing after KubeCon/Google Next

```python
import pulumi
import pulumi_gcp as gcp

# Create a GKE cluster for AI/ML workloads
cluster = gcp.container.Cluster("ml-cluster",
    location="us-central1",
    initial_node_count=3,
    node_version="1.23",
    min_master_version="1.23")

# Create a node pool optimized for ML workloads
node_pool = gcp.container.NodePool("ml-node-pool",
    cluster=cluster.name,
    node_config=gcp.container.NodePoolNodeConfigArgs(
        machine_type="n1-standard-4",
        oauth_scopes=[
            "https://www.googleapis.com/auth/devstorage.read_only",
            "https://www.googleapis.com/auth/logging.write",
        ],
        labels={"team": "ml"},
        shielded_instance_config=gcp.container.NodePoolNodeConfigShieldedInstanceConfigArgs(
            enable_secure_boot=True,
            enable_integrity_monitoring=True,
        ),
    ),
    initial_node_count=2,
    location="us-central1",
    version="1.23")
...
```

This Pulumi script:

- Provisions a **Kubernetes cluster** on Google Cloud.
- Creates a **dedicated node pool** optimized for AI/ML workloads.
- Ensures **security best practices** for machine learning environments.

#### Step 2: Deploy the LLM with RAG Model

> Once the cluster is set up, we can deploy the **LLM with RAG model** using Pulumi’s Kubernetes provider:

Reviewer: i'd add more cross links to docs; specifically here on the K8 provider

1. Define **Kubernetes Deployments** for the LLM and RAG model.
2. Package models as **Docker containers** and deploy them to the cluster.
3. Configure **Kubernetes Services** to expose APIs for model inference.
4. Use **ConfigMaps and Secrets** to manage parameters and credentials.

By defining these resources in Pulumi, deployments become **fully automated, repeatable, and scalable**.

### Use Case 2: Training and Serving Custom Machine Learning Models

Beyond pre-trained LLMs, Kubernetes is ideal for **training and serving custom AI/ML models**. Pulumi can help automate every stage of the ML lifecycle.

#### Step 1: Set Up the Model Training Environment

Using Pulumi, we define a training environment with:

- A **Kubernetes Deployment** for training jobs (GPU-enabled).
- **Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs)** for storing training data and model artifacts.
- **Monitoring tools** for tracking performance.

#### Step 2: Deploy and Serve the Trained Model

Once the model is trained, Pulumi can be used to:

- Deploy the trained model as a **Kubernetes Deployment**.
- Expose the model via a **Kubernetes Service** (REST API or gRPC).

> - Add **autoscaling rules** for dynamic inference scaling.
> 
> Pulumi allows teams to **manage the entire AI/ML pipeline** in a structured and automated way.

Author: ```suggestion
- Add **autoscaling rules** for dynamic inference scaling.

Pulumi allows teams to **manage the entire AI/ML pipeline** in a structured and automated way.

Try Jay’s demo code on [Creating an AI Training Platform on GKE with Pulumi](https://github.com/jasonsmithio/pulumi-experiments/tree/main/ai-ml-platform/gke-training).
```

# https://twitter.com/PulumiCorp/status/1755637618631405655

social:
    twitter:
    linkedin:

# See the blogging docs at https://github.com/pulumi/docs/blob/master/BLOGGING.md
# for details, and please remove these comments before submitting for review.
---

Kubernetes has transformed cloud infrastructure by enabling scalable, containerized applications. While it initially gained traction for managing web applications and microservices, its capabilities now extend to AI/ML workloads, making it the go-to platform for data scientists and machine learning engineers.

Running AI/ML workloads on Kubernetes presents unique challenges, including:

- **Specialized hardware** requirements (e.g., GPUs, TPUs)
- **Scalability** for model training and inference
- **Complex data pipelines** that integrate various cloud services
- **Infrastructure automation** for seamless deployment

Google Cloud Kubernetes (GKE) provides a robust foundation for AI/ML workloads, but managing infrastructure manually can be cumbersome. This is where Pulumi comes in—enabling Infrastructure as Code (IaC) to automate and simplify AI/ML infrastructure on Kubernetes.

> <!--more-->
> 
> ## Pulumi: Automating AI/ML Infrastructure on Google Cloud
> 
> Pulumi is a modern Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool that allows teams to define and manage cloud infrastructure using general-purpose programming languages like Python, TypeScript, and Go. This approach is particularly beneficial for AI/ML teams, as Python is already the dominant language in data science and machine learning.

Author: ```suggestion
<!--more-->

> [!INFO]
> Let's talk about Kubernetes and all you can do! Meet us at:
>
> - **KubeCon Europe Booth S450** - [Request a 1:1 Demo](https://www.pulumi.com/kubecon-europe/)
> - **Google Next'25 booth 1589** - [Join us for a Happy House and/or Request your 1:1 Demo](https://www.pulumi.com/google-next/)
>
> Don’t miss the chance to see Pulumi in action, ask questions, and explore why Kubernetes + Google  Cloud + Pulumi go better together. 🚀

## Pulumi: Automating AI/ML Infrastructure on Google Cloud

Pulumi is a modern Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool that allows teams to define and manage cloud infrastructure using general-purpose programming languages like Python, TypeScript, and Go. This approach is particularly beneficial for AI/ML teams, as Python is already the dominant language in data science and machine learning.
```

With Pulumi, you can:

- **Provision and scale Kubernetes clusters** on Google Cloud automatically.
- **Define AI/ML environments as code**, making deployments repeatable and version-controlled.
- **Integrate infrastructure with machine learning pipelines**, reducing operational overhead.

{{% notes "info" %}}
Want to geek out and get the inside scoop on AI/ML using Kubernetes? Meet us at:

- **KubeCon Europe Booth S450** - [Request a 1:1 Demo](https://www.pulumi.com/kubecon-europe/)
- **Google Next'25 booth 1589** - [Join us for a Happy House and/or Request your 1:1 Demo](https://www.pulumi.com/google-next/)

Don’t miss the chance to see Pulumi in action, ask questions, and explore AI/ML innovations on Kubernetes.🚀
{{% /notes %}}

> ## Deploying AI/ML Workloads on Kubernetes with Pulumi

Author: ```suggestion
## Deploying AI/ML Workloads on Kubernetes
```

- Most AI/ML engineers already work with **Python** or **Go**, and Pulumi lets them manage infrastructure using the same language.
- No need to learn YAML or Kubernetes manifests—define everything programmatically.

### 2. Automate AI/ML Workflows

- Define infrastructure, training jobs, and model serving in **one unified IaC framework**.
- Ensure **consistency** across development, staging, and production environments.

### 3. Improve Scalability and Cost Efficiency

- Pulumi integrates with **Google Cloud AI services** for optimized compute resources.
- Automate **autoscaling and resource allocation** for AI/ML workloads.

### 4. Increase Security and Compliance

- Manage credentials and secrets securely with **Pulumi ESC (Secrets Management)**.
- Apply **policy-as-code** to enforce security best practices.

## Get Started with AI/ML on Kubernetes with Pulumi
Pulumi makes it easy to deploy, scale, and manage AI/ML workloads on Kubernetes, leveraging Google Cloud's AI infrastructure. Whether you're serving LLMs, training custom models, or automating ML pipelines, Pulumi provides a developer-friendly, scalable, and secure solution.

> - [Explore AI/ML Projects using Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/blog/tag/ml/)
> - [Get Started with Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/)
> - [Try Pulumi AI](https://www.pulumi.com/ai)
> - [Pulumi Kubernetes Documentation](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/clouds/kubernetes/)
> - [Register for a Workshop](https://www.pulumi.com/events/#upcoming)
> - [Sign up for Pulumi ➡️](https://app.pulumi.com/signup)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Explore AI/ML Projects using Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/blog/tag/ml/)
- [Get Started with Pulumi on Google Cloud](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/clouds/gcp/)
- [Pulumi Kubernetes Documentation](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/clouds/kubernetes/)
- [Sign up for Pulumi ➡️](https://app.pulumi.com/signup)
```

---
title: "AI/ML on Kubernetes: Deploying Models with Pulumi on Google Cloud"
allow_long_title: true

# The date represents the post's publish date, and by default corresponds with
# the date and time this file was generated. Dates are used for display and
# ordering purposes only; they have no effect on whether or when a post is
# published. To influence the ordering of posts published on the same date, use
# the time portion of the date value; posts are sorted in descending order by
# date/time.

> date: 2025-03-20T07:32:19Z

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2025-03-25T07:32:19Z
```

# The draft setting determines whether a post is published. Set it to true if
# you want to be able to merge the post without publishing it.
draft: false

# Use the meta_desc property to provide a brief summary (one or two sentences)
# of the content of the post, which is useful for targeting search results or
# social-media previews. This field is required or the build will fail the
# linter test. Max length is 160 characters.
meta_desc: Run AI/ML workloads on Kubernetes with Pulumi and Google Cloud. Automate model training, deployment, and scaling with Infrastructure as Code for seamless ML ops

# The meta_image appears in social-media previews and on the blog home page. A
# placeholder image representing the recommended format, dimensions and aspect
# ratio has been provided for you.

> meta_image: meta.png

Author: ```suggestion
meta_image: ai-ml-kubernetes-gcp-blog-article.png
```

> meta_image: ai-ml-kubernetes-gcp-blog-article.png

Author: ```suggestion
meta_image: /blog/ai-ml-on-kubernetes-google-cloud-llm-rag/ai-ml-kubernetes-gcp-blog-article.png
```

> meta_image: /blog/ai-ml-on-kubernetes-google-cloud-llm-rag/ai-ml-kubernetes-gcp-blog-article.png

Author: ```suggestion
meta_image: ai-ml-kubernetes-gcp-blog-article.png

```
